# MICROSOFT CORPORATION’S PARTNERSHIP WITH MISTRAL AI

INVITATION TO COMMENT: CLOSES ON 9 MAY 2024 Microsoft Corporation ( Microsoft ) has entered into a partnership with Mistral AI ( Mistral AI ), involving (a) an investment by Microsoft in Mistral AI, (b) a multiyear agreement through which Microsoft will supply Mistral AI with Microsoft’s Azure supercomputing infrastructure, and (c) a commitment to make Mistral AI’s models available on Microsoft’s Azure platform (the Partnership ).

The Competition and Markets Authority ( CMA ) is considering whether it is or may be the case that the Partnership, or any changes thereto, have resulted in the creation of a relevant merger situation under the merger provisions of the Enterprise Act 2002 and, if so, whether the creation of that situation may be expected to result in a substantial lessening of competition within any market or markets in the United Kingdom for goods or services.

The CMA is keen to ensure that all interested parties have the opportunity to make their views known and present all relevant evidence to the CMA. The CMA is therefore issuing this preliminary ‘invitation to comment’ asking all interested parties to submit to the CMA any initial views on: (1) whether the Partnership has resulted in the creation of a relevant merger situation under the Enterprise Act 2002 and (2) if so, the impact that the Partnership could have on competition in the UK. The invitation to comment is the first part of the CMA’s information-gathering process, in advance of any decision to launch a phase 1 investigation.

The CMA may proactively contact companies and organisations that are active in the markets affected by the Partnership or have valuable insights or evidence that could assist the CMA’s investigation.

To assist it with this investigation, the CMA invites comments from any interested party. Comments should be provided by the deadline set out above to: Principal Case Officer name: Lavinia de Havilland E-mail: [lavinia.dehavilland@cma.gov.uk](mailto:lavinia.dehavilland@cma.gov.uk) Tel no: 020 3738 6 385

Case Officer name: Georgia Cummings E-mail: [georgia.cummings@cma.gov.uk](mailto:georgia.cummings@cma.gov.uk) Tel no: 020 3738 6283

Your name and contact details are your personal data. In collecting, receiving, storing, accessing and using your personal data, the CMA, as controller, is processing your personal data. The CMA processes personal data in accordance with data protection law. The CMA is processing your personal data so that it can contact you again, should it need further help or information from you, in order to carry out its merger work under Part 3 of the Enterprise Act 2002. For more information about how the CMA processes personal data and your rights relating to that data, please see our Privacy Notice .