$\[{\\mathcal{Q}}\\ll\]$ . I felt compelled to get in touch regarding the CMA's notice of possible remedies in the Activisio Blizzard acquisition case.

Our business primarily focuses on releasing video games for various gaming platforms, including both Xbox and PlayStation. In recent years, we've found that our video game sales across Xbox and PlayStation have been moving in different directions, mainly due to the structure of how each platform is laid out.

On PlayStation, we've found our sales growing stagnant with each release. This is mainly due to the fact that, despite PlayStation having the lion's share of player numbers and console sales, that share is mainly provided to larger titles from huge publishing labels, and/or developers and publishers who are willing to spend lots of money on paid marketing within the PlayStation console. This means that on PlayStation, it simply isn't a level playing field for every publisher and developer. It has meant that as the years have gone by, if you put a smaller titles on PlayStation devices now, your title will rarely appear organically to PlayStation players. Instead, you are $100%$ reliant on players knowing about your game already, and searching for it on the store.

On Xbox, the opposite has come true over the last several years. There are numerous means of players finding your game on Xbox, including in special sections on the store, and through the Xbox Game Pass service. As a result, we've found that, despite Xbox having much smaller player numbers and console sales than PlayStation, our games sell just as well on Xbox, since more players are finding our games there. We usually find that the revenue we now make from new games, is more on Xbox than PlayStation due to this fact -- again, despite Xbox being the smaller platform in many ways.

We've found that, whenever there is large public buzz around Xbox, there are more Xbox hardware sales, and as a result we see even better ongoing results on Xbox. With this in mind, I've found myself of the opinion that the acquisition of Activision Blizzard can only be a good thing for smaller-to-mid sized business like ours, as it will no doubt lead to increased sales of Xbox hardware, increased subscriber numbers on the Xbox Game Pass subscription service, and thus, larger sales for businesses like ours on Xbox. Coupled with the fact that Xbox has a better ecosystem currently for players to discover new games, I can only see the acquisition being a positive for a lot of businesses like ours.

The acquisition will not all of a sudden make Xbox the dominant platform. It's far more likely that it may help to create a more level playing field between Xbox and PlayStation which, at this point in time, is sorely needed. PlayStation needs better competition, to force the platform to up its game, and this will surely help to do that.